\input texinfo    @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment %**start of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@setfilename mida.info
@settitle MIDA Manual
@set EDITION 0.4.5
@set VERSION 0.4.5
@set UPDATED 17 October 2015
@set UPDATED-MONTH October 2015
@set LASTCHANGE Fri October 25 22:57:18 EST 2015

@comment %**end of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@synindex vr fn

@copying
This manual describes MIDA language and its realization (version
@value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}).

Copyright @copyright{} 2014, 2015 Mark Karpov

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included in the section entitled “GNU Free
Documentation License”.

@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Languages
@direntry
* MIDA: (MIDA).       MIDA language description.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title MIDA Manual
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for @code{MIDA} Version @value{VERSION}.
@subtitle @value{UPDATED-MONTH}
@author Mark Karpov

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top MIDA

This document describes MIDA language and its primary realization. This
program is distributed under GNU General Public License, version 3.

@menu
* What is MIDA?:: General description of MIDA language.
* Installation:: Instructions to build and install MIDA on
Posix-compatible systems.
* Invocation:: Command line interface of the program.
* Configuration File:: How to change behavior of MIDA via
configuration file.
* Interactive REPL:: How to use MIDA interpreter in interactive mode.
* MIDA Tutorial:: This tutorial teaches concepts of MIDA language.
* GNU Free Documentation License:: License for copying this manual.
* Concept Index:: Index of concepts described in this manual.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@node What is MIDA?
@chapter What is MIDA?

MIDA is a minimalistic declarative language for algorithmic generation
of MIDI files. MIDA is not interactive in sense that you cannot control
result of its activity in real time, it is intended for producers and
should be used with a DAW. MIDA can help you create variative elements
in your music in a very simple way. Since MIDI can control a lot of
different instruments, power of MIDA is truly great.

Main reason for MIDA development is to create software tool that can be
used in such a way that does not change established workflow, so people
could use familiar plugins and software instruments.

Currently MIDA can be used to translate source files into @samp{.mid}
files, and also in interactive mode that will help you to understand how
MIDA language works.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

It's possible to use MIDA on any platform on which
@uref{https://www.haskell.org/platform/,Haskell Platform} is
supported. Here we describe how to compile and install MIDA on
Posix-compatible systems.

@enumerate
@item
@cindex Haskell Platform
Install @uref{https://www.haskell.org/platform/,Haskell Platform};
@item
@cindex Cabal
Install @uref{https://www.haskell.org/cabal/,Cabal};
@item
Download and untar git repository of MIDA, or clone it:
@example
$ git clone https://github.com/mrkkrp/mida.git
@end example
@item
Go to the root directory of the repository and execute:
@example
$ cabal update
$ cabal configure
$ cabal install --only-dependencies
$ cabal build
# sh install.sh
@end example
@item
Done (you can use @code{uninstall.sh} to uninstall the program).
@end enumerate

@node Invocation
@chapter Invocation

@cindex batch mode
@cindex command line options

MIDA can work as translator from source code to MIDI files, or as
interactive environment (interpreter) that functions much like REPL. If
no input file is supplied, MIDA starts in interactive mode by
default. Otherwise, one should use command line options to start MIDA in
interactive mode.

@example
mida [-i|--interactive] [-s|--seed SEED] [-q|--quarter TICKS]
     [-b|--beats BEATS] [-o|--output OUT] [--license] [--version] [FILES]
@end example

Here's the complete list of command line options:

@table @asis
@item @code{-h}, @code{--help}
Shows information regarding invocation parameters.
@item @code{-i}, @code{--interactive}
Starts MIDA in interactive mode. This option effectively disables all
other supplied options, because they only make sense in non-interactive
(batch) mode.
@item @code{-s} @var{seed}, @code{--seed} @var{seed}
Sets @var{seed} for MIDI generation. You can generate identical MIDI
files if you use the same seed. Default value is @code{0}.
@item @code{-q} @var{ticks}, @code{--quarter} @var{ticks}
Sets number of @var{ticks} for quarter note, default value is
@code{24}.
@item @code{-b} @var{beats}, @code{--beats} @var{beats}
Sets total time of result MIDI file as number of @var{beats} (quarter
notes), default value is @code{16}.
@item @code{-o} @var{output}, @code{--output} @var{output}
Specifies @var{output} file. Default value is built from base name of
supplied file and extension @samp{.mid}.
@item @code{--license}
Show license of the program.
@item @code{--version}
Show version of the program.
@end table

@node Configuration File
@chapter Configuration File

MIDA can be customized to some extent with help of configuration
file. One should create the file in his/her home directory. This
directory will be different on different operating systems. On GNU/Linux
machines it would be something like @file{/home/username/.mida}, while
Windows users should create the file @file{C:\Users\username\.mida}.

@cindex configuration file variables

The configuration file uses syntax similar to that of Unix shell. That
is, you can use @samp{#} for line comments, and @samp{=} to assign new
values (spaces before and after @samp{=} are ignored). Currently, all
variables must be strings, integers, or Boolean values. If a string
should contain space, enclose it into double quotes: @samp{"}. Inside
the quotes you can escape characters with backslash @samp{\}. Integers
must be written as decimal numbers. Boolean values can only have values
of @samp{true} or @samp{false}. Everything is case-sensitive.

The following table describes all variables that can be assigned in the
configuration file.

@table @code
@item prog
Index of program that will be used in preview. Default value is
@code{0}. You can change this variable from within the MIDA REPL with
@samp{:prog} command (@pxref{Interactive REPL}).
@item progop
Command line option of external program that will be used for
preview. By default, MIDA uses @code{timidity}, so value of this
variable is @samp{--force-program}.
@item prompt
Prompt that will be used in MIDA REPL. Default value is @samp{> }.
@item prvcmd
Command that will be used to invoke external program for preview. You
can use this variable to supply some options as well. Default value is
@samp{timidity}.
@item prvlen
How many elements are displayed after evaluation of given
principle. Default value is @samp{18}. You can also interactively change
the value form interactive REPL (@pxref{Interactive REPL}).
@item src
Default name of currently active file. If you load some file, this value
is automatically set to its file name. It's used to generate some file
names when you decide to save your session. Default value is
@samp{foo.da}.
@item tempo
Tempo that's used in preview. Default value is @samp{120}, but you can
easily change it with @samp{:tempo} command (@pxref{Interactive REPL}).
@item tempop
Command line option of external program that will be used for
preview. Default value is @samp{--adjust-tempo}, because default program
for preview is @code{timidity}.
@item verbose
This indicates whether or not display simplified principle before
printing the final result of evaluation. Default value is @samp{true}.
@end table

Here is complete example of @file{.mida} file:

@example
#
# MIDA Configuration File
#

prompt = "mida> "
prvlen = 20
verbose = false
@end example

@node Interactive REPL
@chapter Interactive REPL

In interactive mode you can enter principles for evaluation and special
commands to control MIDA environment. MIDA has useful editing
capabilities, similar to those of some shells (@code{bash} for
example). It also has “smart” tab-completion, that is, completion's
logic depends on contents of the input line.

@cindex comments

It's allowed to put comments in MIDA source files or in interactive
environment. MIDA uses Unix shell comment style: line comments starts
with @samp{#}.

@cindex multiline input

Interpreter supports multiline input. It automatically detects
unbalanced parenthesis, braces, brackets. If you want to continue
writing a principle on the next line, end current line with a comma
@samp{,}. Since comma is allowed only between elements of a principle,
MIDA knows that current principle is not completed.

Evaluation of principles will be described later in this document
(@pxref{MIDA Tutorial}). Now, let's examine all the special commands
that are available in MIDA interactive sessions. All the commands begin
with colon @samp{:} and are case-sensitive.

@table @samp
@item :cd
Change working directory. Since MIDA allows to load, save, and generate
various files, it's sometimes convenient to be able to change
directories.
@item :clear
Restore default state of environment removing all (non-standard)
definitions from the memory.
@item :def
Print definition of specified symbol. This command can take several
arguments (names of definitions to print). For example:
@example
> :def dur0 vel0
dur0 = @{5 6 $ 17@}
vel0 = @{50..70@}
@end example
@item :help
Show help text. For example:
@example
> :help
Available commands:
  :cd                      Change working directory
  :clear                   Restore default state of environment
  :def                     Print definition of given symbol
  :help                    Show this help text
  :license                 Show license
  :load                    Load definitions from given file
  :make                    Generate and save MIDI file
  :prog                    Set program for preview
  :prv                     Play the score with external program
  :prvlen                  Set length of displayed results
  :purge                   Remove redundant definitions
  :pwd                     Print working directory
  :quit                    Quit the interactive environment
  :save                    Save current environment in file
  :tempo                   Set tempo for preview
  :udef                    Remove definition of given symbol
@end example
@item :load
Load definition from specified source files. When something is defined,
you usually get some helpful feedback:
@example
> :load projects/music/tst1.da
• «pch0»
• «dur0»
• «vel0»
• «pch1»
• «dur1»
• «vel1»
• «pch2»
• «dur2»
• «vel2»
"/home/mark/projects/music/tst1.da" loaded successfully.
@end example
Note that you can specify as many source files as you wish, they will be
loaded successively and all definitions from those files will be
available in the interactive environment. Nevertheless, remember that
definitions from one file may be silently redefined by definitions from
another file if they have the same names.
@item :make
One of the most common commands is @samp{:make}. It produces MIDI file
based on current state of MIDA environment. This command takes up to
four arguments. If you don't supply any of them, corresponding default
value will be used.

First argument is @dfn{seed} for generator of pseudo-random numbers. We
work with seeds because they allow to generate identical scores given
the same seeds (it's useful sometimes). Default value of this argument
is @code{0}.

Second argument is number of @dfn{ticks per quarter note}. This value
allows to convert abstract numbers that represent duration into
conventional notes. Default value is @code{24}, and usually you don't
want to change it unless you're working with extremely complex rhythms.

Third argument is total length of composition as number of quarter
notes. This parameter is also known as “beats” (although in reality, a
beat is not always equal to quarter note). Default value is @code{16}.

The last parameter is file name of MIDI file. If it's not supplied,
system will try to guess the name. Guessing algorithm is the same as for
@samp{:save} command but extension will be replaced with @file{.mid}.

See the stuff in action:
@example
> :make 1 24 128
MIDI file saved as "/home/mark/projects/music/tst1.mid".
@end example
@cindex program
@item :prog
Set program for preview. MIDA uses external programs to play generated
MIDI files. This command temporarily changes program (timbre). Default
value is @code{0}, but you can choose different default value via
configuration file (@pxref{Configuration File}).
@cindex preview
@item :prv
Play current score with help of external program. To use this command
you need to install program that can generate sound from MIDI files and
has command line interface. Default choice is @code{timidity}. MIDA is
already configured to work with @code{timidity}. This is a useful
program for this sort of job because it provides some console output and
playing can be ceased with @kbd{Ctrl-C} command (on
Posix-systems). Also, you can use @samp{:prog} and @samp{:tempo}
commands to set program (timbre) and tempo respectively.

The @samp{:prv} command itself takes up to three arguments, similar to
those of @samp{:make} command: seed, ticks per quarter note, and total
length.
@item :prvlen
This command allows to specify how many elements of evaluated principle
will be displayed. Default value is @code{16}, but you can choose
different default value via configuration file (@pxref{Configuration
File}).
@example
> 1
≡ 1
⇒ 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1…
> :prvlen 20
> 1
≡ 1
⇒ 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1…
@end example
@item :purge
You can “purge” all useless definitions from memory using @samp{:purge}
command. A definition is considered useless if it's not used as a part
of a top-level definition. Here's an example:
@example
> α = β β = 12 Y = 13 dur0 = α
• «α»
• «β»
• «Y»
• «dur0»
> :def Y
Y = 13
> :purge
Environment purged.
> :def Y
Y =
> :def β
β = 12
@end example
What happened here? Well, we see that @code{dur0} is a top level
definition (@pxref{Definitions}). @code{α} is used in @code{dur0}'s
principle and @code{β} is used in @code{α}'s principle. So, @code{α} and
@code{β} are necessary definitions. What's about @code{Y}? It does not
participate in principle building of any top-level definition. System
considers it redundant, so it purges it.
@item :pwd
Quite obviously, it prints current working directory.
@item :quit
Quit the interactive environment.
@item :save
Save the current environment in MIDA source file. As you compose music
with MIDA, you will need to save all existing definitions to hard
disk. You can then edit them or load them into MIDA to continue your
work. It's quite easy to accomplish with @samp{:save} command. This
command takes an optional argument — file name. If you don't supply the
file name, the system will try to guess it. It will be file name of
loaded source file, last used file name, or default value (it can be
specified in configuration file (@pxref{Configuration File}). I
recommend @file{.da} as file name extension for MIDA source files.
@cindex tempo
@item :tempo
Set tempo for preview. Default value is @code{120}, but you can choose
different default value via configuration file (@pxref{Configuration
File}).
@cindex removing definitions
@item :udef
Remove definition of given symbol. Although standard way to remove
definition is @samp{definition_name =}, i.e. assigning empty principle
to it, you may find @samp{:udef} command more convenient, because it
takes arbitrary number of arguments and it also frees memory that was
allocated for specified definitions.
@end table

@node MIDA Tutorial
@chapter MIDA Tutorial

Now that you know all the basic information about the interpreter, we
can start our journey into the magic world of MIDA.

MIDA is minimalistic, declarative language. In fact, it is so simple
that any statement that has valid syntax will produce valid result. MIDA
statement only has to pass parser, that's all. Declarative nature of
MIDA means that you describe relations between principles that will be
turned into actual MIDI data without describing control flow.

@menu
* Literal Values:: Most basic elements in MIDA.
* Principles:: Some theoretic notions.
* Definitions:: How to create re-usable pieces of code.
* Ranges:: How to write long series of numbers concisely.
* Multivalues:: Elements that have multiple values at the same time.
* Sections:: Elements that are containers for other elements.
* Conditional Multivalues:: Workhorses of algorithmic composition.
* Polymorphic Operators:: How to combine elements?
@end menu

@node Literal Values
@section Literal Values

Start the interactive environment. Now you should be looking at
something like this:

@example
[mark@@arch ~]$ mida
MIDA Copyright © 2014, 2015 Mark Karpov

This program comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY. This is free software,
and you are welcome to redistribute it under certain conditions; see
GNU General Public License for details.

MIDA Interactive Environment 0.4.5
>
@end example

You can try your powers right away. Remember, MIDA is all about
sequences of numbers. Numbers can represent different things:

@itemize
@item
duration;
@item
velocity;
@item
pitch;
@item
modulation;
@item
breath;
@item
aftertouch;
@item
pitch bend.
@end itemize

Let's start from how you can enter the numbers at the prompt and what
you get as a result.

@menu
* Duration:: How duration is represented in MIDA.
* Velocity:: How velocity is represented in MIDA.
* Pitch:: Note alias and other.
* Additional Parameters:: Other parameters.
@end menu

@node Duration
@subsection Duration
@cindex duration

Duration in MIDI is relative to @dfn{ticks per quarter note} (TPQ). TPQ
is set before translation either via command line options or as a
parameter of @samp{:make} and @samp{:prv} commands. As I said, default
value is @code{24}, so try to work with this in mind.

So, if quarter note is @code{24} ticks, whole note will be @code{96}
ticks, while eight note will be @code{12} ticks, etc. You can also use
any number in between creating rather strange rhythms. Remember that you
can use numbers greater than @code{127} for duration, so there is no
limits.

Let's enter a number:

@example
> 24
≡ 24
⇒ 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24 24…
@end example

So, we see that we can enter literal values! However, the result may
look a bit strange, but ignore this repetitiveness for now.

@node Velocity
@subsection Velocity
@cindex velocity

Since MIDI format is piano-oriented, velocity in our case means
loudness. Again, to write down velocities we use plain numbers. Valid
values are form @code{0} to @code{127}, where @code{0} means silence,
while @code{127} signifies loudest note.

Although you can enter literals greater than @code{127}, they are not
guaranteed to be processed correctly.

@node Pitch
@subsection Pitch
@cindex pitch

Sure, you can use the same plain numbers from @code{0} to @code{127} for
pitch, but it's a bit inconvenient. MIDA has predefined “alias” for that
case. Since MIDA doesn't work with negative numbers, we use alias where
octaves start from @code{0}. So @code{c0} corresponds to @code{0},
@code{cs0} to @code{1}, and so on: one semitone per number.

Please note that there is no standard way to number octaves in MIDI. The
MIDI standard only says that note with index @code{60} must be
@dfn{Middle C}. We've chosen zero-based system for reasons that I have
described earlier, some software starts numeration from @code{-2}.

Enter any alias into MIDA and see for yourself that it's just like
entering corresponding MIDI code (note that all alias are
case-sensitive):

@example
> c5
≡ 60
⇒ 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60…
@end example

@node Additional Parameters
@subsection Additional Parameters
@cindex modulation
@cindex breath
@cindex aftertouch
@cindex pitch bend

Parameters like modulation, breath, aftertouch, and pitch bend are
called @dfn{additional parameters}. In section @ref{Definitions} we will
explain why they are called so, but for now it's important to understand
how you can use literal values to represent these parameters and their
change in time.

Additional parameters are written either as plain numbers from @code{0}
to @code{127} or as sum of predefined constant called @dfn{modifier} and
plain number.

Numbers from @code{0} to @code{127} without modifier represent value
that doesn't change during length of note. Modifiers tells MIDA to use
special forms of modulation, while number that's added to modifier
signifies intensity of such a modulation.

This table describes forms of modulation that exist in MIDA:

@table @samp
@item _u
Ascending change for whole duration of note.
@item _d
Condescending change for whole duration of note.
@item _ud
Ascending change for first half of note's duration and condescending
change for the second half.
@item _du
Condescending change for first half of note's duration and ascending
change for the second half.
@end table

So, for example, the command @samp{_ud + 127} represents ascending
change of some parameter for half duration of given note and
condescending change back to initial value for another half. @code{127}
signifies maximal possible intensity of this modulation.

Symbols @samp{_u}, @samp{_d}, @samp{_du}, and @samp{_ud} represent plain
numbers, you can check it in your REPL, but don't use “magic numbers”,
because they may be changed in future versions of MIDA.

@node Principles
@section Principles
@cindex principle

Smallest piece of composition in MIDA is called @dfn{element}. Now we
know at least one kind of element: literal values. Realization of
literal value is just its value. Bear with me and all the stuff will be
clear to you.

The thing we enter in interactive sessions is called @dfn{principle}. A
principle can consist of zero or more elements. These elements may be
separated by commas @samp{,}. Let's try some principles:

@example
> 1, 2, 3
≡ 1 2 3
⇒ 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3…
> c5 d5 e5 f5 g5 a5 b5 c6
≡ 60 62 64 65 67 69 71 72
⇒ 60 62 64 65 67 69 71 72 60 62 64 65 67 69 71 72 60 62…
@end example

So, we enter a principle and MIDA prints its realization. Realization of
principle is built this way:

@enumerate
@item
system tries to simplify given principle by de-referencing definitions
and applying some operators, such as ranges or polymorphic operators (by
default MIDA shows result of this step after identity symbol @samp{≡});
@item
MIDA cycles elements (not their values, you'll see difference later), so
we have now infinite collection of elements;
@item
it realizes all the elements one by one.
@end enumerate

Realization can be either infinite sequence of non-negative numbers or
@dfn{bottom} @samp{⊥}. Bottom is realization of empty principle and it
is said to be less defined than any other result.

@example
>
≡
⇒ ⊥
@end example

In the next section we will see other rôle of bottom.

@node Definitions
@section Definitions
@cindex definition
@cindex identifier

I've said that it's quite hard to write an incorrect statement in
MIDA. Let's prove it. Here's my attempt:

@example
> foo
≡
⇒ ⊥
> asdfasdflk
≡
⇒ ⊥
> 1 2 rere 5
≡ 1 2 5
⇒ 1 2 5 1 2 5 1 2 5 1 2 5 1 2 5 1 2 5…
@end example

So, MIDA thinks that these things are realized to @code{⊥}, they can be
even put inside a principle without any obvious harm.

The thing is that MIDA considers any alpha-numeric sequence of
characters that does not begin with a number @dfn{identifier} (from MIDA
0.4.1 identifiers can contain underscore @samp{_}). Identifier has
associated @dfn{definition}. Definition can hold a principle and default
value of any definition is empty principle. You can combine definitions
to build really complex principles. Keep in mind that names of the
definitions are case-sensitive.

Definitions are created by putting definition name on the left side of
equation sign @samp{=} and a principle on the right of the sign. Let's
give it a go:

@example
> α = 1 2 3
• «α»
> α
≡ 1 2 3
⇒ 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3…
> α 5
≡ 1 2 3 5
⇒ 1 2 3 5 1 2 3 5 1 2 3 5 1 2 3 5 1 2…
@end example

Remember that definitions are like recipes how to create a principle and
they live in interactive environment. So we can change a definition and
all other definitions which use it will change accordingly:

@example
> α = 5 β = 6 Y = α β
• «α»
• «β»
• «Y»
> Y
≡ 5 6
⇒ 5 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 5 6…
> β = 10
• «β»
> Y
≡ 5 10
⇒ 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10…
@end example

And since all possible definitions are bound to empty principles, we can
even design our principles in top-down manner, using definitions that we
haven't defined yet.

Now you're ready to create your first piece of music, but before you do
it I should explain something about @dfn{top-level definitions}. These
are special names that represent duration, velocity, pitch, and other
parameters of voices. There may be up to @code{16} different voices in a
MIDA score.

The names are as following:

@itemize
@item
@code{dur_} — duration;
@item
@code{vel_} — velocity;
@item
@code{pch_} — pitch;
@item
@code{mod_} — modulation;
@item
@code{bth_} — breath;
@item
@code{aft_} — aftertouch;
@item
@code{bnd_} — pitch bend.
@end itemize

Replace @samp{_} with index of desired voice, valid values are from
@code{0} to @code{15}.

Let's create some music (or “music”, creation of real music is left as
an exercise for the reader):

@example
> dur0 = 24 vel0 = 70 pch0 = c5 d5 e5 f5 g5 a5 b5
• «dur0»
• «vel0»
• «pch0»
@end example

It's as simple as that! Other top-level definitions hold empty
principles, so their realization is bottom @code{⊥}, thus they will be
ignored. Additional parameters like modulation, breath, aftertouch, and
pitch bend may be omitted (that's why they are called “additional”) — in
this case there will be no corresponding events in result MIDI file. Use
@samp{:make} command to create a MIDI file:

@example
> :make 0 24 14
MIDI file saved as "/home/mark/foo.mid".
@end example

We can play the music from MIDA interactive environment right now!  Here
is how (make sure that you have installed @code{timidity}, and
configured it correctly):

@example
> :prv 0 24 14
MIDI file saved as "/tmp/foo.mid".
Requested buffer size 32768, fragment size 8192
ALSA pcm 'default' set buffer size 33868, period size 3760 bytes
Playing /tmp/foo.mid
MIDI file: /tmp/foo.mid
Format: 1  Tracks: 1  Divisions: 24
Playing time: ~9 seconds
Notes cut: 0
Notes lost totally: 0
@end example

Play with this example a little more. Try changing the definitions. Try
to set different tempo and different timbre using @samp{:tempo} and
@samp{:prog} commands (@pxref{Interactive REPL}). Try to define several
voices that sound simultaneously (define @code{dur1}, @code{vel1}, and
@code{pch1}).

@node Ranges
@section Ranges
@cindex range

Now that you know all the basics, we can talk about advanced methods of
element manipulation. Simplest such a method is @dfn{range}. Range in
MIDA is written as two numbers separated by two commas @samp{..}
(without space between them). Range notation represents collection of
successive natural numbers from left-side number to right-side number
inclusively.

@example
> 1..3
≡ 1 2 3
⇒ 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3…
> 5..2
≡ 5 4 3 2
⇒ 5 4 3 2 5 4 3 2 5 4 3 2 5 4 3 2 5 4…
@end example

Although you cannot specify step between resulting elements, you can add
a number to all elements of a principle or multiply all the elements by
given number. How? Keep reading!

@node Multivalues
@section Multivalues
@cindex multivalue

So far, we've worked only with literal values. But MIDA knows one more
kind of element: @dfn{multivalue}. Multivalue is such an element that
has many values at the same time. You know, just like electron exists in
different positions around atomic nucleus. Realization of multivalue is
a pseudo-random value chosen from all possible variants.

Multivalue is written as collection of possible values inside of braces:

@example
> @{1..3@}
≡ @{1 2 3@}
⇒ 1 2 2 2 3 1 2 1 1 1 2 2 3 1 3 1 2 1…
@end example

As you can see, the same element is replicated, but its realized value
is different for every instance. Here we have uniform distribution, but
you can change it with help of repetition:

@example
> @{1 1 2 3@} # 1 → 50%, 2 → 25%, 3 → 25%
≡ @{1 1 2 3@}
⇒ 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 3 1 3 3 3 1 2 1 3 3 1…
> @{1 $ 8, 2 3@} # 1 → 80%, 2 → 10%, 3 → 10%
≡ @{1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 3@}
⇒ 1 1 2 1 3 1 1 3 1 1 3 3 1 1 1 1 1 1…
@end example

Basic operators work together! (@samp{$} operator will be considered
later, @pxref{Repetition}.) You can put a multivalue into another
multivalue too:

@example
> @{1 @{2 3@}@} # 1 → 50%, 2 → 25%, 3 → 25%
≡ @{1 @{2 3@}@}
⇒ 3 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 2 1 2 1 1 3 1 3 2…
@end example

@code{1} has probability 50%, and @code{@{2 3@}} has probability
50%. Inside @code{@{2 3@}} every element has equal probability 50%, so
result probabilities look like: @code{1} — 50%, @code{2} — 25%, @code{3}
— 25%.

@node Sections
@section Sections
@cindex section

@dfn{Section} is another kind of element. Section is collection of
elements that can be manipulated as one element.

Sections are written as a principle inside of square brackets (@samp{[}
and @samp{]}):

@example
> [1..3]
≡ 1 2 3
⇒ 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3…
@end example

Typical example of their use is in juxtaposition with multivalues. With
help of sections you can easily use sequence of elements as part of
multivalue:

@example
> @{1 2 [3..5]@}
≡ @{1 2 [3 4 5]@}
⇒ 3 4 5 3 4 5 1 2 1 2 3 4 5 2 3 4 5 1…
@end example

So here we have @code{1} with probability @code{1/3}, @code{2} with
probability @code{1/3} and @code{3 4 5} with the same probability. We
could use multivalues in the section too to get arbitrary complex
structures.

@node Conditional Multivalues
@section Conditional Multivalues
@cindex conditional multivalue

One step forward is @dfn{conditional multivalues}. These are just like
multivalues, but they depend on realized value of previous element. For
every value of previous element conditional multivalue provides
collection of possible results. If there is no such a collection, random
collection will be selected from all existing collections. If first
element of a sequence is conditional multivalue, actual multivalue
(collection) will be chosen randomly for the first iteration.

This example demonstrates syntax of conditional multivalue and its
logic:

@example
> @{<1> 2 3 <2> 3 <3> 1@}
≡ @{<1> 2 3 <2> 3 <3> 1@}
⇒ 1 3 1 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 3 1 2 3…
@end example

If the last element has value @code{1}, conditional multivalue will have
value @code{2} or @code{3}. If the last element has value @code{2},
conditional multivalue will have value @code{3} for sure, and so on.

Conditions are checked from left to right, first matched condition
selects realization of one of corresponding elements.

It's also possible to use multiple conditional elements:

@example
> @{<1 2> 3 <3> 1 2@}
≡ @{<1 2> 3 <3> 1 2@}
⇒ 3 1 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 2 3 1 3 2 3 2…
@end example

You can use sections to match not only on the last element, but on
sequence of elements:

@example
> @{<[1..3]> 4 <1..4> 1..3@}
≡ @{<[1 2 3]> 4 <1 2 3 4> 1 2 3@}
⇒ 4 3 1 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 3 3 1 1 2 3 4 1…
@end example

Here, @code{1 2 3} triggers @code{4} while any other single element
triggers @code{1}, @code{2}, or @code{3}.

You can use multivalues in conditional clauses as a sort of “or”
operator, consider the following example:

@example
> @{<[1 @{2 3@}]> 7 <1..7> 1..6@}
≡ @{<[1 @{2 3@}]> 7 <1 2 3 4 5 6 7> 1 2 3 4 5 6@}
⇒ 7 1 1 6 1 1 2 7 1 1 4 1 3 7 3 4 5 5 1 3 7 6 5 1 4 2 5 1 1 2 7 1 4 6 2 1…
@end example

Here our first condition says “if last but one realized element is
@code{1} and after it goes @code{2} or @code{3}, result will be
@code{7}”.

As always, you can use conditional multivalues inside of any part of
other conditional multivalues, but sometimes such complex structures are
difficult to understand for human living being.

Be careful when using empty principles in conditional multivalues! Once
conditional multivalue happens to choose empty principle, it may hang,
because this principle won't add any elements and last element will
remain the same. This may be a desirable situation only when you have
other elements in your principle, not single repeating conditional
multivalue.

@node Polymorphic Operators
@section Polymorphic Operators
@cindex polymorphic operators

Now you know about all basic elements in MIDA. There are a number of
operations that can be performed on these elements. You can combine all
kinds of elements and the operators will behave differently according to
types of their operands. Thus, we call the operators @dfn{polymorphic}.

All operators in MIDA are infix (or prefix, if unary) and left
associative. All operators have the same precedence, so they are always
applied from left to right. However, you can use parenthesis @samp{(}
and @samp{)} to change order of evaluation.

@menu
* Basic Arithmetic:: How to add, subtract, multiply, and divide elements.
* Repetition:: How to repeat elements.
* Rotation:: How to rotate sections.
* Reverse:: How to reverse elements.
@end menu

@node Basic Arithmetic
@subsection Basic Arithmetic
@cindex arithmetic operations
@cindex addition operator
@cindex subtraction operator
@cindex multiplication operator
@cindex division operator

To perform arithmetic operation, put @samp{+}, @samp{-}, @samp{*}, or
@samp{/} between two elements.

@example
> 1 + 3
≡ 4
⇒ 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4…
> 7 + (2 * 2)
≡ 11
⇒ 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11…
> 7 / 2
≡ 3
⇒ 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3…
>  (4 - 1) / 0
≡ 3
⇒ 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3…
> 7 - 100
≡ 0
⇒ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0…
@end example

Note that we don't work with negative numbers in MIDA, so subtraction
and division work a bit different than you might expect: if difference
between two values is negative, it will be substituted with
@code{0}. This is example of “saturation”. If you divide something by
zero, you will get dividend unchanged.

You can put any element into arithmetic expressions. Different types of
elements will produce different effects:

@example
> [1..3] + 10
≡ 11 12 13
⇒ 11 12 13 11 12 13 11 12 13 11 12 13 11 12 13 11 12 13…
> [1..3] + [0 10]
≡ 1 11 2 12 3 13
⇒ 1 11 2 12 3 13 1 11 2 12 3 13 1 11 2 12 3 13…
> [1..3] + @{0 10@}
≡ @{1 11@} @{2 12@} @{3 13@}
⇒ 1 12 13 1 12 13 11 2 3 11 12 3 1 2 13 1 2 13…
> @{1..3@} + [0 10]
≡ @{[1 11] [2 12] [3 13]@}
⇒ 1 11 1 11 1 11 1 11 2 12 2 12 1 11 1 11 1 11…
> @{<1> 2 <2> 1@} + 5
≡ @{<6> 7 <7> 6@}
⇒ 6 7 6 7 6 7 6 7 6 7 6 7 6 7 6 7 6 7…
> @{_u _d _ud _du@} + 127
≡ @{511 639 255 383@}
⇒ 511 255 383 639 383 639 383 639 255 639 383 383 511 511 639 639 511 255…
@end example

General rule for type of result element:
@itemize
@item
if one of operands is a literal value, result will have type of most
complex operand.
@item
if both operands are complex elements (not literal values), then result
will inherit type of left hand operand.
@end itemize

In general, we can say that every value of left hand operand is
“processed” by right hand operand (according to operator), and results
are collected together to make up result of the same type as left hand
operand.

@node Repetition
@subsection Repetition
@cindex repetition operator

Operator for repetition is @samp{$}. Principles of evaluation are a bit
different from arithmetic operators:

@example
> 1 $ 3, 10
≡ 1 1 1 10
⇒ 1 1 1 10 1 1 1 10 1 1 1 10 1 1 1 10 1 1…
> @{1 2@} $ 3, 10
≡ @{1 2@} @{1 2@} @{1 2@} 10
⇒ 1 1 1 10 2 1 2 10 1 2 1 10 2 1 1 10 1 1…
> [1..3] $ 3, 10
≡ 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 10
⇒ 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 10 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2…
> 1 $ @{2 3@}, 10
≡ @{[1 1] [1 1 1]@} 10
⇒ 1 1 10 1 1 1 10 1 1 10 1 1 1 10 1 1 10 1…
> [1..3] $ [2 3 1], 10
≡ 1 1 2 2 2 3 10
⇒ 1 1 2 2 2 3 10 1 1 2 2 2 3 10 1 1 2 2…
> @{1..3@} $ [2 3 1]
≡ @{1 1 2 2 2 3@}
⇒ 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 3 2 1 3 1 2 1 3 3 2 2…
> @{1..3@} $ [@{2@}]
≡ @{[1 1] [2 2] [3 3]@}
⇒ 3 3 3 3 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 3 3 2 2 3 3…
@end example

@node Rotation
@subsection Rotation
@cindex rotation operator

You also can “rotate” a principle with caret @samp{^} operator, removing
its former elements that will appear at the end of the principle:

@example
> [1..3] ^ 1
≡ 2 3 1
⇒ 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1…
> [1..3] ^ @{1 2@}
≡ @{[2 3 1] [3 1 2]@}
⇒ 3 1 2 2 3 1 3 1 2 2 3 1 2 3 1 3 1 2…
> [[1..3] $ 3] ^ [0 2 1]
≡ 1 2 3 3 1 2 2 3 1
⇒ 1 2 3 3 1 2 2 3 1 1 2 3 3 1 2 2 3 1…
@end example

This is so-called left rotation, but you can emulate right-rotation too
knowing length of given principle. Note that rotation only makes sense
applied to sections.

@node Reverse
@subsection Reverse
@cindex reverse operator

Reverse is the single unary operator in MIDA. It has the highest
precedence, this means that it is evaluated before all other operators:

@example
> @@[1..3]
≡ 3 2 1
⇒ 3 2 1 3 2 1 3 2 1 3 2 1 3 2 1 3 2 1…
> @@@{[1 2] [3 4]@}
≡ @{[2 1] [4 3]@}
⇒ 4 3 2 1 4 3 4 3 2 1 4 3 4 3 2 1 4 3…
@end example

As always, arbitrary complex elements can be reversed.

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@bye
